[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Coming into
presence and Dadirri,
now is as simple as
allowing ourself to pause,
to connect with our
breath, to be seated,
and best so here on Country.
And we begin with breathing
in deeply in through our nose,
out through our mouth.
And with each in-breath,
we breathe in with openness
so that we become
completely open.
And with our out-breath,
surrendering, emptying, letting
go fully into this moment.
And as we deepen
with each breath,
we are carried into
our innermost center.
Here, deep presence.
Here, deep listening,
fully open,
sensing, experiencing what
is here in this moment.
And so as we breathe in now
into our innermost core,
gently affirm, I am here.
I feel this ability to sit
with Country, with nature
as our ancestors have done
for tens of thousands of years
is the calling for us
to come home, for us all
to reconnect, to recognize
our oneness, our shared
relationships, but not just
relationships, our shared
responsibility to life,
to each other, to Earth.
And in the midst of all of
the confusion, the chaos,
the crises that are
unfolding around the world,
that is the call for everyone.
The message that Earth
is bringing to us
is the same message.
Doesn't matter where we're from,
our culture, our background,
our age.
We're all part of
this same generation.
It's the regeneration.
Acknowledging our grandfathers,
our great-grandfathers,
our great-great
grandfathers, our ancestors,
the men who have
walked behind us,
who have our back,
who protect us.
We sit here knowing you are
firmly rooted behind us.
We acknowledge you.
We honor you.
We thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As we rest here
now upon the roots
of great-great-grandfathers,
great-grandfathers,
grandfathers, fathers,
we receive the strength
and the wisdom
that we need here.
We receive the gentleness of
these young trees as children.
We are here open
hearted, not knowing,
ready to learn, to be guided,
and to receive our heart's
truest intention.
With this, spirit invites
you now to listen in Dadirri.
What is your heart's intention?
As you receive this,
it is a message of not
what you will become but
what you are, perhaps what
you need to reaffirm or
reacknowledge or step into more
clearly and be ready
to receive the guidance
to move forward as this.
As you contemplate
this, recognize
what it is you are being
asked to acknowledge
as an I am statement.
It may be as simple as, I
am here, or I am enough,
or I am surrendered.
Whatever it is will
be what it will be.
It will be perfect for you.
>> Thank you my ancestors
for your divine intervention,
for I am your humble servant,
your greatest invention.
To be among and as one with all
that is, my place, my purpose,
my perception is heavenly and
grounded in belief and bliss.
So I'll always be who I believe
I am until your discernment
guides me to what
I don't understand,
living, giving, dealing,
feeling, healing, hoping,
coping, gifting, shifting,
training, maintaining to be
a warrior of wisdom
and a worthy being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As soon as I walked in
and placed my staff against
the tree, [NON-ENGLISH].
And as I laid down, all of the
little birds came in and sang.
It's all my female ancestors.
The breeze moved in and swirled
through the trees and spoke,
gave me what I needed.
This is just one example of how
rich and abundant connection
and guidance is when we are
with ngura and waltja, kurrunpa,
tjukurpa.
All of this is the
weaving in every moment.
When we have all those
four pillars in place,
when we are in the
center with that,
we know [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
Everything is one.
Everything is interconnected.
We receive every bit of
intelligence possible.
But if we disconnect from
even just one of these,
we cut off a supply of
intelligence, a supply of love,
of nurturing,
care, and strength.
The first of the four
sacred pillars being ngura.
Connection to Country
and nature means
we're plugged into the
intelligence, the true nature
of everything, incarnate,
not as something abstract,
not something transcendent
that we have to reach to
and we have to get over
things or pass things
but that we're actually
connected with it.
And then naturally, we
see the relationship
between all things,
waltja, kinship.
Naturally, we care
about all living things
because we realize we are a
part of every living thing.
And every living
thing is a part of us.
We are absolutely dependent
on every living thing.
We're created not for
ourself but to fulfill a role
for every living thing,
waltja, kinship, family,
every rock, every leaf under
my feet, every blade of grass,
every leaf that surrounds
me, the air that we're
breathing right this moment, the
birds, the insects that are all
here.
I'm acutely aware that
every single one of these
is contributing to our life,
our breath, our being right
here, right now.
The third pillar being
kurrunpa, our soul,
our spirit that we imagine very
often on the spiritual path
that because we're so
divided and disconnected,
we have to put our attention
and focus first on spirit,
our soul, to awaken, to
remember our true self when it's
actually much harder to
awaken with a singular
focus in that way because
we're still disconnected
from the manifestation
of spirit,
of soul, which is
here, birth, creation.
So when we're connected
with nature, Country,
we cannot help but see
the interconnectedness
of everything.
And we celebrate it.
We live it in sacred relating.
And when we're living
it in sacred relating,
we see and feel the
unique expression and soul
of every single living thing.
But we also recognize it is
the one same spirit and soul,
kurrunpa.
We can never fail when we
are connected in that way
because we never become trapped
in the ego identification which
causes the division,
and power over,
and the idea that everything
revolves around me.
One of the most
beautiful, deepest,
profound things I heard my
Pappa Kunumurra say to me,
we were talking about
this interconnectedness
and the nature of
this human quest
to find that
reconnection and oneness.
And his words were, always
remember, yes, there
is oneness, but you
are not number 1.
That's it in a
nutshell, isn't it?
>> This is Angophora, and
also called a Sydney red gum.
And it's also an
amazing tree to work
with issues around sexuality.
So I've had people who
have come here for healing,
and they might be dealing with
abuse or things from the past.
And I bring them here, and
the tree does the healing work
with them.
It brings through their own
wisdom, their own healing.
Maybe it's a
release of emotions.
And it's also been great
when we've had partners
with intimacy
issues or whatever,
and we let the tree
help guide them.
This one here is the first.
It's like the pioneer.
And what happens
in nature, you'll
often have one that will come
out first and test the waters.
And then it communicates
with the others and said,
yeah, everything's right to
go, and then the rest of them
will come and flower.
This is the sort
of wisdom you start
to get when you really
watch and notice
the changes that are happening.
So this is one that
I often work with,
with people who
often are pioneering,
the sort of path-cutters,
way-showers,
because there's something
within this that speaks to them.
And on Wanneroo
Country, the elders
here taught me about their totem
tree or plant is the wattle,
and how there's a wattle
and a certain wattle that
will come and bloom at
the beginning of spring.
And then it has a DMT,
and it communicates
to the rest of them.
So yes, it's now time for
everyone to safely come out
and blossom.
So imagine having that quality
within yourself, to really
sense that timing, to sense
when everything's ready for you
to bring forth your
flowering, your shining.
>> You spoke about
the invisible.
And in lore, we speak of it
as being [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
and that is the unseen.
And then [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
which is to be made seen.
So it's not that
it doesn't exist
in the way our modern
mind interprets it,
the invisible as if it
doesn't exist or it's without
substance.
So if you really feel into
that [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
the unseen, in other words, it's
there but it hasn't been seen
yet, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
to be made seen.
And so when we walk in Dadirri,
you begin the journey from
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] to
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]..
And our awakening
is that journey.
>> So the first principle of
practice and state of being is
Dadirri, which in general terms
would usually be translated
as deep listening.
And it's oftentimes
used culturally
in terms of how we can really
move towards reconciliation.
But Dadirri is much
deeper than this.
It is whole receptivity.
It is being so
deeply present where
we are, how we are, with
what we are in each moment,
that we are deeply listening,
deeply seeing, deeply
feeling, deeply tasting, deeply
smelling, deeply sensing.
These spirits want all
that is good for you,
all that is right for you.
The water around, all the life
force that is in this water,
contains healing energy, all
the elements for nurturing,
for growth, for
restoration and renewal.
And it's like welcoming now,
welcoming all of the nurturing,
loving energies of life.
Ngura, to being deeply
connected here with Country.
Waltja and kinship,
feeling the synergy
of every living creature
here in this moment with you.
Kurrunpa, the soul, the
spirit of this place,
past, present, emerging, our
ancestors, your ancestors,
past, present, and emerging.
We acknowledge this.
We acknowledge Country.
We are here humbly as children
to welcome and to receive
this healing now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Here is the power of this
truth, that in every moment,
as the breath rises and falls,
as thoughts come and go,
sensations flow, life in its
continuum, within all of this
is the unchanged,
unborn, undying.
This self, the one that is
listening, sensing, being,
experiencing, this Dadirri, pure
awareness, this one remains,
always has been, always
is, always will be.
As this awareness,
deeply centered,
aligned, and open,
grounded, connected,
breathing deeply,
breathing into your form,
feeling the radiance,
the vibration
within you of this living
presence in continuum
and that which is unchanged.
And as you breathe deeply, feel
it flowing from cell to cell,
vibrating through your
aura, radiating in synergy
with all existence.
Here, the one field of being
within and without, all united,
always here, always being.
As you breathe with
this, acknowledge
this ever-constant presence,
the stillness and the vibrance,
the silence and
the song of life,
the unchanged and the
ever-transforming flowing
continuum, the revering of life.
All is here, rising from
the unseen, to the seen,
and again back into the unseen.
All is here.
As we breathe with this
now, we are this presence.
Breathing into the body,
feeling yourself here,
connected with ngura, Earth.
She is a part of you.
You are a part of her
and every living being.
And as you breathe into
your form, into your body,
feel this presence
deep in your bones
flowing through your blood,
vibrating in rhythm with Earth
and creation all around you.
Take a deep breath
into your heart center
now as you acknowledge the
sacred presence that is life
here within you and all around
you, the love, the grace,
the power, the
peace, the oneness.
All is here.
So once we feel the connection
with the first three
sacred pillars--
ngura, waltja,
kurrunpa-- we then
have a natural grasp of
tjukurpa, which is law.
And that, this lore, L-O-R-E,
which encompasses all
of the cosmic laws of creation,
of dreaming, the dream time,
the song lines, essentially
the comprehension of everything
that exists, how
and why it exists.
And from that, we then
have laws, L-A-W-S,
that enable us to maintain
and uphold with deep sacred
responsibility our part within
the law of the cosmos so that
we maintain balance within
ourself and with each other.
And those laws govern
our society, our systems.
For tens of thousands
of years, our people,
having lived deeply in
relationship with creation,
have seen and known that
everything of creation
is emerging through
the vibration of sound.
Everything is sung into being.
Before a child is
even conceived,
let alone born, the
child is already
being sung in by the people
who are already existing,
by the ancestors,
by the Country,
the creatures of the place.
When that soul is conceived,
there is a singing vibration.
When that soul is in utero,
there's a singing vibration.
When the child is born,
the child is sung in.
And so all things are
created in this way.
It's not a linear trajectory.
We sometimes think
of a song line
as having a beginning, and
an end, and a specific track.
But it's multidimensional.
It's much more
complex than that.
Which is why sometimes
it's called song spirals,
because there's a
weaving in and out
of so many different layers,
and dimensions, and elements.
There's a weaving of the
ancient past within the present
and the future integrating
in the present,
adapting and evolving.
In our culture as Aunty
B. mentioned before,
we didn't have iPads, and we
didn't write and communicate
in that manner.
We communicated by way of whole
brain learning, whole brain
education.
And so it was oral.
It was through
song, dance, but it
was also through
direct association
with all of our surrounds.
And there are particular
places or parts of nature
that become memory
banks for our people.
And it's one of the
ways our people were
able to store information,
thousands of names of species,
thousands of places,
knowing tracks, where to go,
when to go, how to go,
without our modern devices.
So the scribbly gum is an
example of this capacity for us
to remember.
So we might allocate
this scribble
as a particular part
of a dreaming story.
And by associating the
shape of the scribble--
it could also be in a rock,
markings, lines in a rock--
we give them a
specific association
to perhaps a creature,
or a place, or a species,
or as I said in this example, a
particular part of a song line
or a dream story.
Learning to memorize in
this way has been now
proven to be one of or
actually the most effective way
of developing our
storage capacity
and our ability to memorize.
That's been scientifically
researched and proven.
These songs have been passed
on through each generation,
through rites of passage,
through stages of initiation.
There is a song
master who carries
all of those precise songs and
laws that represent Country
and our relationship within it.
Hunting, seasons,
foods, the relationship,
the laws in our social
systems, et cetera--
all of these things are
contained within the songs
and within the Country itself.
And then people within the
clan, knowing and memorizing
different sections or
parts of the song lines,
and then coming together in
corroboree, in our ability
to put together an entire
song line as a collective.
And to be able to
walk Country and sing,
our whole way through
Country, knowing
that even if we have never
walked on that place,
we will know how to go and where
to go based on the song line
that we have been given.
Our people have been so
passionate about reconciliation
and about holding
onto our culture
and restoring our culture.
Because when we lose our
language, we lose Country.
We lose creation.
We lose our song lines,
and Earth begins to die.
If we are not singing and
speaking in resonance with her,
our heart closes down.
Our minds become dulled.
We're no longer able to
see, and feel, and hear
the sacredness of life.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
That, in essence, means,
of the light, I am.
As a woman of Earth and
as people of the light,
we are here as one.
>> The grandmothers approve.
>> If we really pause
deeply and look at ourself,
the nature of our mind or
the nature of any moment,
any event, we will see
the truth of the illusion,
that nothing is fixed or
permanent or defined the way
the mind makes it.
Where do we begin?
Where do we end?
Where have we come from?
Everything we are experiencing
was first only imagined.
Where did image come from?
It comes from within
our awareness.
It comes from all
around us, to come
into a space of true
feeling connection.
If we don't get the
feeling connection
and it's just abstract,
it's just a concept,
we don't have the empathy.
We don't have the
care for each other.
And if we don't have that,
we don't take responsibility.
We don't see that we're a part
of the sacred circle of life,
and that each and
every one of us
is as sacred and as
necessary to the whole.
This tree here
representing direction.
There are many
different directions
its limbs are reaching out to.
Now, the deeper we go
into our connection,
the more deeply we root ourself,
the more spacial and panoramic
we do become.
And we're no longer confused
as much by direction
but open to any and all
possibilities of direction.
And this is life, isn't it?
How many of you
would recognize that
through these turbulent
times, your sense of direction
is being disrupted
and redirected so
suddenly, unexpectedly?
So bear with.
We are in a time of great
acceleration and change,
and all of those
shifts of direction
are an invitation for
us to surrender more
to be ever ready
and spontaneous,
and to welcome the
guidance from life
rather than try to control
and determine that direction
ourselves.
>> The spirits,
knowledge holders,
and traditional owners
of this Country,
I am humble here in your
presence on your traditional
tribal lands to be guided
through a journey of respect
and righteousness of our
ever-present future that is
derived from our past
culture and spirituality,
that has evolved from injustices
in the past that are beyond
our control.
So give me patience, wisdom,
insight, hindsight, foresight,
to be influential in
what I'm able to control
in my near future
as a unified person
within a harmonious society.
I give you my day.
You show me the way
and what to say.
Come to my dreams at
night, because spirits
don't call the qualified.
They qualify the call--
neither better, strong
or weak, no time to talk,
the spirits speak.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We are all indigenous
in the core of our being.
And the only reason
it's forgotten
is because that dispossession
happened so far back,
it's buried right down
deep in the subconscious.
It's not gone.
It's just buried.
It just needs to be re-awoken.
And the way we re-awaken that
is by just taking the moments
to sit and be here.
Be with Country.
Sitting Dadirri, deep
listening, sitting Dadirri, deep
seeing deep feeling,
and it will wake up.
[MUSIC - ISIRA, "IN LOVE I AM"]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
In love I am, in love I am,
in love I am, in love I am.
In love I am, in love I am.